Inflation (#233)
CliMA/EnsembleKalmanProcesses.jl: docs/src/inflation.md

# Inflation 
Inflation is a approach that slows ensemble collapse in Kalman methods.
Two distinct forms of inflation are implemented, in which perturbations are applied immediately following the standard Kalman update. 
Multiplicative inflation expands ensemble members away from their mean in a
deterministic manner, whereas additive inflation hinges on the addition of stochastic noise to ensemble members.

> For both implementations, a scaling factor ``s`` is included to extend functionality to cases with mini-batching. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For both implementations, a scaling factor ``s`` is included to extend functionality to cases with mini-batching. 
```

[Huang et al, 2022](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.04386) eqn. 41:

```math
\begin{aligned}
    m_{n+1} = m_{n} ; \qquad u^{j}_{n + 1} = m_{n+1} + \sqrt{\frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}}} \left(u^{j}_{n} - m_{n} \right) \qquad (1)
\end{aligned}
```
where ``m`` is the ensemble average. In this way,
the variance across parameter vector magnitudes is increased by a factor of ``\frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}}``, while the mean remains fixed.

Multiplicative inflation can be used by flagging the `update_ensemble!` method as follows:
```julia
    EKP.update_ensemble!(ekiobj, g_ens; multiplicative_inflation = true, s = 1.0)
```

## Additive Inflation 
Additive inflation is implemented by systematically adding stochastic perturbations to the parameter ensemble in the form of gaussian noise. Additive inflation breaks the linear subspace property, meaning the parameter ensemble can evolve outside of the span of the initial ensemble. In additive inflation, the ensemble is perturbed in the following manner after the standard Kalman update:

```math
     u_{n+1} = u_n + \zeta_{n} \qquad (2) \\
    \zeta_{n} \sim N(0, \frac{s \Delta{t} }{1 - s \Delta{t}} C_n) \qquad (3)
```

> This increases the variance across vector components by `` \frac{s \Delta{t} }{1 - s \Delta{t}} ``, while the mean remains fixed.

Reviewer: Be careful when saying "increase", as above we **multiply** the variance by `1/(1-sDelt)` whereas here we **add** `sDelt/(1-sDelt)` to the variance.
Actually these give a new ensemble with the same variance right? Adding noise to each particle gives new variance scaled by `1 + sDelt/(1-sDelt) = (1-sDelt + sDelt) / (1-sDelt) = 1/(1-sDelt)` Might be worth clearing this up

Reviewer: Oh we need C_n here

# Inflation 
Inflation is a method which systematically adds stochastic perturbations to the parameter ensemble in the form of gaussian noise. 
Following the standard Kalman update, the parameter ensemble is perturbed in the following manner:
```math

>     u_{n+1} = u_n + \zeta_{n} \qquad (1)

Reviewer: This is just the additive inflation. Perhaps just write down that the mulitplicative inflation based on expanding the ensemble away from it's mean in a deterministic way, while additive inflation is based on adding this noise term?

```

where `` \zeta_{n} `` is noise drawn from a gaussian distribution. Two distinct forms of inflation are implemented.

> For both implementations, a scaling factor ``s`` is included to extend usage to cases with mini-batching. For mini-batching,

Reviewer: could you first mention that ``Delta t``, then mention the `s` in regards to this?

the scaling factor should be:
```math
    s = \frac{|B|}{|C|}
```

> where `` |B| `` is the mini-batch size and `` |C| `` is the full dataset size, to account for sampling error. 

Reviewer: ", to account for sampling error" should be moved earlier

> ## Multiplicative Inflation 

Reviewer: mention that multiplicative inflation does not change the span of the ensemble, but additive inflation does (in their respective sections)

Multiplicative effectively scales parameter vectors in parameter space, such that the perturbed
ensemble remains in the linear span of the original ensemble. The implementated update equation follows
[Huang et al, 2022](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.04386) eqn. 41:

```math
\begin{aligned}
    m_{n+1} = m_{n} ; \qquad u^{j}_{n + 1} = m_{n+1} + \sqrt{\frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}}} \left(u^{j}_{n} - m_{n} \right) \qquad (2)
\end{aligned}
```

> where ``m`` is the ensemble average which remains unchanged after the perturbation.  

Reviewer: In this way the variance of the ensemble is increased by ... while the mean remains fixed

Multiplicative inflation can be used by flagging the `update_ensemble!` method as follows:
```julia
    EKP.update_ensemble!(ekiobj, g_ens; multiplicative_inflation = true, s = 1.0)
```

## Additive Inflation 
Additive inflation breaks the linear subspace property, meaning the parameter ensemble can evolve
outside of the span of the initial ensemble. In additive inflation, the update equation draws
noise from the following distribution.

```math
    \zeta_{n} \sim N(0, \frac{s \Delta{t} }{1 - s \Delta{t}} C_n) \qquad (3)

> ```

Reviewer: this increases the variance by ... while the mean remains fixed

# Inflation 

> Inflation is a approach that slows ensemble collapse in Kalman methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inflation is an approach that slows down collapse in ensemble Kalman methods.
```

> Two distinct forms of inflation are implemented, in which perturbations are applied immediately following the standard Kalman update. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two distinct forms of inflation are implemented in this package. Both involve perturbing the ensemble members following the standard update rule of the chosen Kalman process. 
```

Multiplicative inflation expands ensemble members away from their mean in a
deterministic manner, whereas additive inflation hinges on the addition of stochastic noise to ensemble members.

For both implementations, a scaling factor ``s`` is included to extend functionality to cases with mini-batching. 
The scaling factor ``s`` multiplies the artificial time step ``\Delta t`` in the inflation equations to account for sampling error. For mini-batching, the scaling factor should be:
```math
    s = \frac{|B|}{|C|}
```
where `` |B| `` is the mini-batch size and `` |C| `` is the full dataset size.

## Multiplicative Inflation 
Multiplicative inflation effectively scales parameter vectors in parameter space, such that the perturbed
ensemble remains in the linear span of the original ensemble. The implemented update equation follows
[Huang et al, 2022](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.04386) eqn. 41:

```math
\begin{aligned}
    m_{n+1} = m_{n} ; \qquad u^{j}_{n + 1} = m_{n+1} + \sqrt{\frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}}} \left(u^{j}_{n} - m_{n} \right) \qquad (1)
\end{aligned}
```
where ``m`` is the ensemble average. In this way,

> the parameter covariance is increased by a multiplicative factor of ``\frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}}``, while the mean remains fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the parameter covariance is inflated by a factor ``\frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}}``, while the ensemble mean remains fixed.
```

```math
     C_{n + 1} = \frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}} C_{n} \qquad (2)
```

Multiplicative inflation can be used by flagging the `update_ensemble!` method as follows:
```julia
    EKP.update_ensemble!(ekiobj, g_ens; multiplicative_inflation = true, s = 1.0)
```

## Additive Inflation 

> Additive inflation is implemented by systematically adding stochastic perturbations to the parameter ensemble in the form of gaussian noise. Additive inflation breaks the linear subspace property, meaning the parameter ensemble can evolve outside of the span of the initial ensemble. In additive inflation, the ensemble is perturbed in the following manner after the standard Kalman update:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additive inflation is implemented by systematically adding stochastic perturbations to the parameter ensemble in the form of Gaussian noise. Additive inflation breaks the linear subspace property, meaning the parameter ensemble can evolve outside of the span of the initial ensemble. In additive inflation, the ensemble is perturbed in the following manner after the standard Kalman update:
```

```math
     u_{n+1} = u_n + \zeta_{n} \qquad (3) \\
    \zeta_{n} \sim N(0, \frac{s \Delta{t} }{1 - s \Delta{t}} C_n) \qquad (4)
```

> This increases the parameter covariance by a multiplicative factor of ``\frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}}`` as in eqn. 2 , while the mean remains fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This inflates the parameter covariance by a factor of ``\frac{1}{1 - s \Delta{t}}`` as in eqn. 2 , while the ensemble mean remains fixed.
```
